Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Watson. Today Igen by
Doctor Camilla North. She's an Assistant Professor of Cognitive
Neuroscience at the University of Cambridge. And today we're
talking about her great book, The Balanced Brain, The
Science of Mental Health. So doctor nor welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's great to be on the decent.
Great. So uh actually let me start by asking
you um general questions. So why do you think
we should care about mental health? I guess that
in a way the answer should be obvious, but
perhaps there are more, less obvious answers to these
questions. So
well, I'll tell you the obvious answer, but then
I guess I'll tell you answers that are a
little bit more particular to my own views on
mental health. So the obvious answer is that everyone
either firsthand or second hand has experience of a
mental health condition. That's how common they are. They're
extraordinarily disabling, probably the foremost cause of disability in
the world. That's why we hear about them all
the time. But actually, I think even though we
hear about them all the time, we might not
be hearing about them quite in the right way.
So my view is that much of the dialogue
about mental health gets a few things wrong, conflates
a few things and ultimately can be a little
bit unhelpful for people with mental illness. So my
interest is kind of trying to and speak to
some of those issues in particular. For example, the
fact that mental and physical health problems cannot be
so clearly articulated as separate phenomena. That's something I'm
I'm very interested in. And then, you know, maybe
even more importantly, the fact that things we think
of as psychological or biological explanations are also kind
of false categories in and of themselves. And I
think much of my research, but also my book
really works to overturn those dichotomies.
And and what is really the idea of the
balanced brain? What do you mean by that in
the book?
So I don't think there's a kind of separate
category of brains in the world that are balanced
and you're, it's a binary thing, you're either balanced
or not. And oh God, if only I had
a balanced brain, no, I think the balanced brain
is a process, a process of homeostatic, responding to
challenges in your environment, the way that your body
responds to challenges like thirst or temperature changes. So
too, must your brain be able to respond to
major challenges to its own kind of mental health?
Its own, I conceptualize that as a kind of
predictive view of the of the world and its
its role in it. And so I think the
balanced brain is a set of processes that we
all have that can sometimes for various reasons, balance
in a different direction, perhaps a direction towards a
negative mood state or towards a state of chronic
anxiety. But via the same processes and intervention that
target those processes can actually usually most of the
time and most people restore a sense of mental
health. So I don't think of mental health as
being a constant state of happiness or euphoria. I
think of it as a return to balance despite
constant frequent challenges that we all encounter.
But then from your perspective, specifically, as a cognitive
neuroscientist, how would you define mental health? And what
is it the result of exactly? Or where does
it come from?
So I think of mental health. So different people
have completely different answers to that question. You speak
to an economist and they'll probably tell you something
to do with maybe life satisfaction. Like the happiest
countries in the world are the ones where people
say they're happiest in their lives. And then you
speak to a um an animal neuroscientist and they
might tell you something like, well, it's kind of
like how long a rat swims for when it's
in a submerged maze. Do you know what I
mean? These seem radically different as a cognitive neuroscientist.
I actually think that there are common mechanisms that
apply to both circumstances. Both an evaluation of your
own motivational drive to get out of a submerged
water maze and your own estimation of the of
your life satisfaction, they of micro differences. But actually,
if you look at it on a subjective scale,
how happy people feel, these kind of hedonia qualities
versus general life satisfaction. There tends to be, it
tends to be best explained by a single factor.
Statistically, meaning the most likely explanation is that there
are kind of common mechanisms driving the the micro
and the micro estimations of mental health.
And of course, when we think about our mental
health, many times, we refer to things like pleasure.
And you mentioned how economists, for example, talk a
lot about happiness. So I guess that leisure would
correlate with happiness in a way. So, but in
the book, you distinguish between two different types of
pleasure, feeling good at one moment in time and
feeling good about your life in general. So why
do you make this distinction?
I think I felt I had to make those
distinctions or start with those distinctions in in some
senses because everybody else does, they're kind of conceptual
distinctions. They're actually not distinctions that I think are
very important. That's why I think understanding, for example,
the brain mechanisms of feeling happy at a moment
in time is that they are actually very important
for understanding the mechanisms of feeling happy durably throughout
your life for longer periods of time.
And, and what is really the role that pleasure
and pain play in our lives? How important are
them?
So, I think I started my book with a,
a long discussion of pain. And I think that's
because for many people, pain is not a mental
health symptom. It's not something that gets talked about
in mental health awareness campaigns. It's not something where
you would show up and say, oh, I'm struggling
with my mental health because I have pain right
now. Nevertheless, I think it's actually a kind of
classic example of how your own bodily experience can
be filtered, enhanced, suppressed by mechanisms that are going
on in the brain. So this this is really
something that happens in the context of chronic pain
where the state of chronic pain to the brain
has much in common with depression, probably more than
it has in common with acute pain like stubbing
your toe. But there are also a few interesting
things we can learn from acute pain, things that
are momentarily uncomfortable because they relate to the opioid
system which gives us an inro to pleasure. So
in rat studies, for example, um submerging rats in
cold water, not too cold but pretty cold for
a little bit of time, not too long, but
a decent amount of time releases opioids um in
the brain much in the same way that drugs
can sometimes release opioids or exercise, can sometimes release
opioids there. You might have heard them called endorphins.
So that's why I start with pain and pleasure
because I think they're an inro into that basic
kind of momentary pleasure response that is somewhat underpinned
by opioids in the brain.
And do we have a good understanding of the
neurobiology behind pleasure and pain? I mean, how the
brain constructs these mental experiences, these subjective experiences?
Yes and no. So something that's quite easy relatively
is to find out the neural and biological correlates
of pleasure and pain. This would be something like
putting someone in a brain scanner and finding which
regions are most related to the experience of pleasure
or pain. These are the regions that as they
increase in subjective pleasure, these are the regions that
become more active or same for pain. But what's
a little bit more difficult? Something my labs particularly
interested in is finding causal relationships between things going
on in the brain mechanisms in the brain and
subjective experiences like pain and pleasure. One of the
reasons that's very difficult is that often in neuroscience
for causal approaches, we turn to animals. So we
might use some of the most beautiful causal studies
are done with a technique called optogenetics, which is
a way of temporarily activating and deactivating certain subsets
of cells in certain regions in the brain. So
it's a really elegant test of kind of turning
on and off different brain functions because this is
a somewhat invasive technique that we essentially can't do
in human experiments. There's a translational gap because we
also can't ask a rat whether it's feeling pleasure.
So in my view, we we need a few
different types of approaches to kind of overcome that
problem. And this means that we know a little
bit less about the causal role of certain brain
structures in pleasure and pain. But things that we
can do include, for example, looking at patients who've
experienced strokes in that regions, which can sometimes eliminate
sense of pleasure or some pain. Um OR for
example, using drugs that enhance pleasure or pain or
even types of brain stimulation.
And so when it comes to pleasure specifically, I
would imagine that uh we have different roads to
pleasure and when it comes to our mental health,
some of them would uh be better or better
consequences for our mental health and others wouldn't be
as good, like for example, using uh drugs to
achieve pleasure and stuff like that. So uh things
related to addictive behavior, for example. So uh what
are really the different roads that we have to
pleasure from a neuroscientific perspective and why some of
them might be more dangerous than others.
So I think truly, the evidence suggests that pleasurable
things are helpful for mental health in the short
term, even when those same things might be detrimental
in the long term. So for example, an opioid
drug can be in the short term helpful for
your mental health, but in the long term, the
adverse consequences can outweigh that. But that's not exclusive
to drugs. So, for some people, they might get
a pleasurable response from, I don't know, skydiving out
of an airplane. But obviously that too comes with
some risks. So I don't think of it so
much like there are good pleasures and bad pleasures
but more that all pleasures are good but some
come with more risks than others.
Mhm And, and I, I mean, when it comes
to dealing with mental health issues, many times, we
have this sort of austerity approach like we have
to the economy as well where we talk a
little, a lot about self control and about long
term planning and delaying gratification and all of that.
But is austerity really always the best route to
mental health or can we at least sometimes focus
a little bit more on a short term pleasure?
Yes, I'm not a massive fan of these approaches
that you mentioned where it's kind of deprive yourself
of everything good and that will somehow improve your
mental health. It's, you know, at the very least
it's counterintuitive. But I also think there's research to
suggest that actually what we might want to do
is enhance people's pleasurable experiences, whether those are social
or food based or activity based. Um AND not
somehow suggest that everybody should just do things that
are quote unquote, good for them at the expense
of things that they enjoy, that seems, you know,
really, really unhelpful for mental health.
And so in the book, you also explore the
ways by which the brain connects to the rest
of the body because I guess that mental health
is not just about the brain itself. So what
are some of the ways that these connections occur
that are relevant specifically to mental health?
So I'm quite excited by that bit of the
mental health field. I think it's had real resurgence
in the last decade. And I'm sure I'm sure
everybody's seen it, seen it in the news, various
aspects of the body being so influential for your
mental health. Some of it is true and exciting.
Some of it is perhaps closer to just hype.
But I'll give you an example of something I
think is on the true side. So you might
have read that things like your immune system affect
your mental health. And this initially, I think some
of the strong evidence for this came from epidemiological
studies. So big group studies showing that people with
higher levels of inflammation, which you can measure by
various blood based markers also have higher rates of
mood anxiety and other types of mental health problems.
But there is an issue with those kinds of
studies. There could be a whole third factor say
poverty, say another health condition that simultaneously increases risk
for poor mental health and heightened inflammation. So I
think some of the most convincing evidence in that
field is not just the fact that those big
epidemiological studies exist, but that in a lab, you
can also create worse mental health or mental health,
life changes in the brain by increasing someone's level
of inflammation. And scientists can do that using things
like vaccines that temporarily increase inflammation. So something like
a flu vaccine, um or in fact, there are
also vaccines that increase inflammation more than the flu
vaccine can temporarily worsen people's mood and people are
differentially susceptible to this probe. So I'm actually someone
who really has mood symptoms after certain vaccines, um
feeling down. And that's because at least in some
of this evidence, people whose inflammatory states increase most
after these vaccines are the ones whose brains change
in the direction of depressed patients areas like the
subgenual anterior singular cortex, which is robustly related to
depression change also after these methods of increasing inflammation.
So that's a causal link between increased inflammation and
worse mood.
So you focused in your answer mostly on the
immune system. But nowadays, many times we hear people
talking about the gut and the gut microbiome. Uh
AND many people, I mean, perhaps because it's a
new field of study or a relatively new field
of study, I guess, and many times people overhype
the results, I guess uh uh there's backlash from
some neuroscientists and, and people like that. But uh
how do you look at the, how do you
read the literature on the potential effects that the
gut or the gut microbiome might have on mental
health and the brain in general. So
I am so I would almost separate my enthusiasm
for, to answer the question about the gut versus
the gut microbiome specifically because the gut itself has
a very complex and interesting nervous system. For example,
most serotonin in the body is actually in the
gut. So it it stands to reason that some
very interesting aspects of our mental states might be
influenced by things happening in the gut. And some
of my own work actually has shown that if
you change the state of the gut. So in
this case, we used an anti nausea drug that
changes um the state of the gut, that's how
it combats nausea. And we changed people's levels of
disgust, avoidance using that drug. So something that you
wouldn't imagine the gut was connected to the gut
had a causal role in influencing. And you can
also see this in the other direction. So I
think most people have probably experienced things like stomach
pain, nausea, even vomiting when they feel very stressed
or anxious. So I would, I would feel pretty
confident in saying that there's a bidirectional relationship between
processes in the gut and in the brain as
to the influence of the microbiome on those processes.
I think it's a really exciting field, but I
don't think that the evidence is as definitive and
I would probably use the immune system as a
comparison because like the immune system, you can see
in epidemiological studies that there is a relationship between
microbiome diversity. So that's like how many different kinds
of gut bacteria you have and heightened states of
worse mental health, heightened anxiety, heightened depression, but if
you do it in the lab, so say you
give someone antibiotics which is a way of messing
with the gut microbiome or you give them ways
of increasing gut microbiome diversity. The evidence is not
so definitive. Some studies maybe but some, some studies
seem less convincing. So this could be for a
few different reasons. It could be, we haven't totally
understood which gut bacteria are important or which context
they're important in. But another reason is those causal
links can often be found in animal studies who
are living in kind of germ free environments who
have various genetic factors often controlled. And in humans,
it might be that there's a contribution but it's
quite small compared to all these other things that
matter. So I I think there is still some
uncertainty about just how important the role of the
microbiome is in mental health, even though it's kind
exciting and interesting. And then the very final thing
I'll say on that because actually I think it's
a really cool area and so I could go
on for a while is that although I'm still
hesitant about the kind of direct link between microbiome
diversity and mental health. I do think there's more
likely to be an indirect link either additionally to
or or instead of. And by that, I mean,
microbiome health almost certainly relates to gut health. And
if you're having gut symptoms, your mental health is
worse, you know, for many, many people. So in
that respect, I think there may well be this
kind of uh sideways connection between the two that
could end up being quite important for some
patients. A more indirect link then?
Yeah.
So uh and, and of course, uh I would
imagine that when it comes to the relationship between
the brain and the rest of the body, when
it comes to mental health, this would be a
two way street, right? We've been talking here about
how, for example, the immune system and the gut
influence uh the uh the brain physiology and all
of that and how of course, then that has
impact in terms of our mental health. But uh
how about the other way around? Is it that
the way the body, uh uh the brain influences
some other parts of the body or some of
our physiology might also have an impact on our
mental health?
Yes, I I would say substantially, which is interesting
because I think it's often the other direction that
people are aware of the fact that, you know,
possibly what you eat or what illnesses you have
are affecting your mental health. People are quite attuned
to that. But in fact, the other way around
is almost certainly the case that processes happening in
your brain are also affecting your peripheral physiology. So
I gave the example of, you know, feeling sick
when you're anxious. But there are, there are actually
so many, it's very obvious to look at effects
on the cardiovascular system of stress, anxiety, depression. And
in fact, it's to the extent that in many
mental health conditions, but particularly psychosis, there are profound
effects on physical health and earlier mortality because of
physical health. So I actually think that the effects
of mental health and physical health are, it's one
of the most important things that we need to
look at sort of as a as a field
at the moment. But I think we're still actually
growing in understanding, especially about common mechanisms that could
then lead later to worse mental and physical health.
So, for example, in my lab, we've become quite
interested in the role of um factors in the
brain and body affecting metabolic as well as mental
health. Because if you look at conditions like diabetes
and depression, they often co occur in the same
people. So it could well be that certain changes.
So for example, insulin receptors in the brain might
simultaneously affect your mental and physical or via metabolic
health.
And perhaps that also points to w uh something
that you brought up at the very beginning of
our conversation about how it probably doesn't make much
sense for us to think about physical health and
mental health as two separate things.
Right. Yes, it not that there aren't important distinctions
to be made about the types of processes that
are causing symptoms because it can help you find
the best treatment. But I, I don't think it's
helpful for example, to say that just because some
physical system in the body is involved, then it
must not be a sort of something that could
be helped with psychological therapy. That that bit of
the argument is patently untrue. There are many people
with physical symptoms in the body who've been helped
by psychological therapies.
So getting into another topic, now, how much do
our expectations, positive or negative impact our mental health?
So I talk about expectations as a kind of
key ingredient, a key constituent of where our mental
health comes from. And maybe I would even go
a little bit further now and say that in
some senses, I think they define our mental health.
So our expectations in the broadest sense, often unconscious
beliefs about the state of the world and our
own situation in the world. That really is the
closest we can get to what mental health means
from a brain perspective.
And what is the difference between emotions and moods?
And why does that matter for mental health?
So some scientists have drawn a line between emotions
and moods for a few reasons because emotions can
come and go relatively quickly, might be more subject
to certain kinds of interventions and also might not
in and of themselves be pathological. So we all
feel sadness, fear, disgust, these are very normal things,
not things to treat necessarily, but a mood state,
for example, a long term state of low mood,
which can be major, depression is a very significant
change in how someone sees the world. It is
an immediate effect on someone's mental health. Um And
you know, probably should be studied and also treated
slightly differently than emotions as kind of normal human
experiences.
Another thing that you talk about in the book
and I guess also plays a very important role
in mental health is motivation. So what do we
know about how motivation works from a neuroscientific perspective
and what is its role in mental health actually?
So we know quite a lot about it. And
the reason for that is because unlike pleasure, it's
pretty easy to study motivation in animals. And I
actually think motivation is an and neglected aspect of
mental health because people take it for granted. People
might think more immediately about things like pleasure, but
motivation might be sort of lower down on their
list. Despite the fact that I would argue, it's
actually even more fundamental, you cannot experience anything pleasurable
unless you have the sort of motivation to get
there. You can't ever adjust your expectations unless you
have the drive to experience new things that might
adjust your expectations. So I think motivation is a
really crucial component and we do have a relatively
good understanding of how it works from a neural
perspective. Um From a cognitive perspective, we also have
um computational models to describe motivation. So this is
a kind of very uh full field from multiple
domains and also not just relevant to mental health.
So these very that we know affect motivation, things
like the dopamine system areas in the brain involved
in drive in wanting things. These are altered, not
just in some psychiatric disorders like depression, but also
in some neurological disorders like Parkinson's disease. So in
fact, there are sometimes these common motivational syndromes um
that are slightly different but underpinned by similar processes
between Parkinson's disease and depression, for example,
and you mentioned depression there. And I guess that
probably when it comes to motivation, one of the
hardest things for people who never suffered from depression
to understand is how low motivation can be for
depressed people and why it is that sometimes they
actually cannot do anything. I mean, they just can't
really. Yeah, exactly. And this has actually been, this
relates to some ideas about how to treat depression
as well. So um a few weeks ago, there
was a news story everywhere about how effective exercises
as a depression treatment. And you know, generally I
support that exercise works well for many people with
depression, but it should never be regarded as a
panacea in my view, nor should anything. But I'm
going to use exercise as an example here because
there are many people with depression who could never
just on its own, engage with exercise because they
fundamentally are essentially prohibited by their symptoms. So they
would need an addition of a medication or some
other kind of intervention even to consider doing some
exercise. So I think it really is a, a
sometimes it's a barrier that is very difficult to
overcome for people with quite severe symptoms.
Uh And you mentioned exercise there. What factors play
a role in what strategies techniques, uh habits, activities
work for a particular person when it comes to
dealing with their own mental health. I mean, and
why are individual differences in what works for one
person and but might not work for another?
So I suppose, I think this is the most
important question that we are grappling with in mental
health today, which is we have for a long
time taken a group based approach. What's the best
treatment for depression? What's the best treatment for generalized
anxiety? But that approach whilst it works for some
really doesn't work for many people. There remains a
lot of people who are ineffectively treated by even
our best treatments or who have to try many
treatments until they find one that works. And there
are a few different reasons for that. But I
think the biggest reason for that is that we
don't, if you have a cough, we don't just
give you one thing for a cough. We try
to find out what's causing the cough and then
treat that and that's what we need to begin
to do with different mental health conditions. Find out
biologically what mechanisms are causing the depression that you're
in, what mechanisms are causing your state of generalized
anxiety and then treat those mechanisms. So for example,
if you're someone for whom these motivational circuits that
I've mentioned are profoundly disruptive, there are treatments that
map better onto those than to other circuits in
the brain. But the this is a research problem.
This is not yet something we can do clinically.
And I would say from an individual perspective, the
biggest take home is actually that when something doesn't
work for you, it doesn't mean anything is worse
about you or even worse about the treatment. If
a treatment doesn't work for you, the treatment may
well work for many people. What what it means
is that there hasn't been a correct match between
your problems, the origins of your problems and what
the treatment is changing.
Probably something very important for people to keep in
mind. The fact that if something in terms of
psychotherapy medication psychiatry doesn't work for them, it doesn't
mean that it wouldn't work for many other people
and also vice versa, right? I mean, it's not
that one size fits all in psychiatry or clinical
psychology.
Right. Yeah, it's one of the, uh, it's one
of the most frustrating things in some specs of
this field where people have a negative experience with
a certain treatment and extrapolate or even say, look,
this treatment only works in X percent of people
or in X percent of cases. So it should,
we shouldn't bother using it. I think it, it
actually is a kind of misunderstanding of what we
need to be doing as a field which is
not throwing any treatments that are effective for a
decent number of people out rather better understanding when
to use them who to use them in.
Mhm. Yeah. And perhaps many times what happens is
that people go through several different kinds of uh
psychotherapies, uh medications and nothing seems to work and
they get really frustrated and that's also understandable.
Yeah. And to those people, I would say what
we need to be able to do is to
offer the widest breadth of treatments possible. So um
for example, in the UK, we offer kind of
first line treatments, things like antidepressant drugs, but also
cognitive behavioral therapy. And that work for many people
with depression, but not everyone, for some people in
a few smaller numbers of clinics popping up across
the country, they might have access to other kinds
of treatments like for example, transcranial magnetic stimulation. So
I think what we need to do is make
sure we have on offer different treatments that might
better treat different people.
So, since we're already getting into treatments and interventions,
could you tell us a little bit about placebos
and placebos and why they matter in this context
of mental health?
So, because I think expectations are so central to
mental health, then of course, any treatment that changes
expectations can affect mental health and perhaps one of
the most well known ways to change expectations is
via what's the placebo effect. And I talk about
this throughout my book, actually, the importance of placebo
effects in different kinds of treatments. I don't think
they should be as dirty a word as they
are right now like, oh, it was just a
placebo effect. Actually, a placebo effect means a lot
and it means perhaps even more for mental health
symptoms than for other symptoms though it plays a
role in other symptoms. So even drugs that we
know have independent effects. So let's say opioids, which
we've already been talking about, they have an effect
on pain reduction. But if you don't know, you're
receiving an opioid, they have a much smaller effect
on your experience of pain, meaning these drugs that
we know well, that are very reliable, clinically used
everywhere, partially but not entirely depend on the placebo
effect. And so the same is true across a
number of different treatments. And so I think, rather
than sort of saying we need to avoid the
placebo effect, which is true for people in, in
my camp running a trial, let's say, as a,
as a say a patient or even as a
clinician, you might want to think about enhancing the
placebo effect because for an individual person's treatment, that
could be the difference between it working and not
working essentially if they expect it to work.
So now we're going to get uh to go
through some questions that are probably more sensitive. Uh
And it's good that we have, we've already prefaced
this with by saying that if something doesn't work
for someone, it doesn't mean necessarily that there's nothing
out there that uh will uh won't work for
them. But talking about antidepressants specifically, um first of
all, uh do they work? And if so how,
because that's a question that many people ask.
Yes, I understand why people are asking this question.
Um Both questions in fact, and I think there
is a clear answer to the first question and
a slightly less clear answer to the second. So
antidepressants do work overall, but that doesn't mean they
work for every single person. It doesn't mean every
single antidepressant works for every single person. And it
doesn't always mean that the side effects outweigh the
benefits for every single person. But I think the
most robust data looking across the best studies in,
you know, using the best techniques I think are
pretty definitive that as a whole they work better
than placebo. Nevertheless, I think a very important discussion
has emerged around antidepressants because not everybody has a
positive experience with antidepressants. There's some suggestion that in
some cases they might be overused or used for
prolonged periods time when they might not necessarily be
suggested, maybe they're used instead of therapy because therapy
isn't available. Um SAY for financial reasons. So I
think there's a really important discussion to be had.
But I do think there has been a backlash
that is specific to psychiatric medication and psychiatric medication
is being held to a different standard compared to
other medical treatments, other effective medical treatments that come
with side effects that don't work for everyone. And
I, I do think much of the debate originates
from essentially a philosophical difference about whether psychiatric symptoms
are indeed biological and then manifests as a debate
about antidepressants, but that's not really in their, in
people's heart of hearts. I think that's not the
real debate that's happening
a and related to that just recently, if I
remember correctly, probably late 2022 early 2023 there was
an article that came out questioning the serotonin theory
of depression. Uh What do you make of that?
Is depression really the result of a chemical deficit
or imbalance in, for example, serotonin or any other
hormone or neurotransmitter?
Yes, great. So that's the kind of second part
of the question do they work? And how do
they work? And I would say this is not
totally tick boxed answered yet. The same is true.
Of course, non mental health treatments as well. Um
Many drugs have effects. We don't entirely understand but
we know they work. But I think in the
case of antidepressants. So um I don't know if
everybody knows this, but the reason we use antidepressant
drugs that affect the serotonin system is because originally
other drugs that affected the serotonin system, but also
dopamine and noradrenaline were found to improve people's mood.
So this is a a serendipitous effect, a coincidence
that happened to work. And then from there, people
sort of back explained why the drugs worked. Oh
OK. Well, they increase these levels of neurotransmitters. There
must therefore be a deficit in these neurotransmitters and
that the evidence is mixed for that. I would
say the, the review that you're referring to, there
are a number of issues with that review. So
I wouldn't take it as definitive evidence against that
hypothesis. But I think there are a number of
papers suggesting complexities with that explanation. So I don't
fully buy a serotonin deficit explanation either. And in
fact, I don't think anybody does, even when I
was an undergraduate, we were taught that wasn't the
full. So I think a more reasonable explanation is
that for some people, there may be differences in
the serotonin system, those might actually often be the
people for whom antidepressants work. But for other people
even people for whom it works. It might not
be something as simplistic as a deficit, but rather
a change in the functioning of regions where serotonin
works, where serotonin does things. And that means that
by adjusting serotonin levels, it can improve mood for
those people. So I think one of the most
compelling explanations for the efficacy of antidepressants is kind
of one level above uh a chemical deficit. It's
a cognitive explanation. So if you give someone a
single dose of antidepressants, it doesn't affect their mood.
Um IT usually takes a couple of weeks to
do that, but it does affect their serotonin. So
this is kind of perplexing if you think all
it is is a serotonin deficit and probably why
I think that's not the case. Um INSTEAD a
single dose of antidepressants or a series of shorter
term doses over a few days can cause immediate
changes in someone's interpretation of a emotional stimuli. This
would be like if you're looking at a face
is that face angry or neutral or happy. And
it sounds simplistic. But in fact, these decisions, this
information processing is what we do all day every
day. We interpret noisy ambiguous situations in the world
as phd, positive, negative or neutral. And these micro
interpretations can then build up into our overall expectations
about the world, our mood. And so I think
these micro changes that antidepressants enact and this is
work that was sort of very beautifully demonstrated by
two professors at Oxford, Katherine Harmer and Phil Cowan
and their teams. I think those micro changes are
the reason why antidepressants work for many people is
by changing information processing in the world, emotion processing
in the world.
And what about psychedelics? What can we say about
them at this point in time? Because actually, uh
this uh this at least to some extent, um
I guess we should be even more careful about
them because even outside of the medical field, there
are ways by which people can, for example, get
access to some mushrooms nowaday and nowadays and microdose
or something like that. So what does the literature
at this point say about psychedelics and their potential
benefits for mental health?
So for a long time work on psychedelic drugs
was suppressed in the mid 20th century, psychedelic drugs
seemed like a potentially promising treatment for mental health
conditions. But then for other reasons, governments essentially suppressed
use and also research into these drugs. And that
was undoubtedly a bad thing. I think overall a
suppression of research into a new class of drugs
is always unh if that drug has potential, has
kind of clinical potential, which I would say psychedelics
do. But as to the kind of direction and
strength of that clinical potential, I think we're still
working it out and there are a few reasons
why it's difficult. So one reason is because of
the level of excitement and hype for psychedelics, sometimes
hype is a good thing and, you know, obviously
suppression is a bad thing. But, but hype is
itself a challenge because it means that weak data
that confirms the hype can get publicized and picked
up and, you know, people are, are excited about
it and strong data that goes against it can
get dismissed and thought. Oh, well, you know, maybe
not that study because they didn't quite do this
or that. So there's a kind of different standard
of evidence applied based on whether it confirms people's
enthusiasm. Um WHEREAS I guess my feelings on psychedelics
is that they absolutely show some clinical potential, but
they need, um we need to evaluate them as
a, as a society, but also as scientists with
precisely the same standards as we would use for
a new another class of new antidepressant. So sometimes
the very same people who are skeptical about antidepressant
drugs and their efficacy are enthusiastic about psychedelics, which
is really to me because I think we need
to be cautious about side effects and when to
use antidepressants. And so too, we need to be
about psychedelic drugs. So some of the most exciting
evidence for psychedelic drugs um for example, in in
treating depression shows effectiveness of even a single session
of psychedelic drugs on people's longer term mood life
satisfaction, all those variables that we were talking about.
But we really need a better understanding of where
side effects come from, which people they should be
used in and how they work to fully kind
of realize their, their potential. Um, LIKE everything else.
I don't think they're panacea, but I do think
they are a really interesting area for research. And
I have been quite excited. Um, AND in fact,
I'm, I'm interested in running studies uh, in that
area in my lab as well. And I, I
don't, by the way, think that they're useless either.
I think they're absolutely. So I'm a, I'm um
I'm advocating for good psychedelic research. Um Not none
at all.
So another very sensitive question now does psychotherapy work
and what are the ways by which we can
tell whether it works or not?
Um So psychotherapy is an effective treatment for depression,
but it depends which kind of psychotherapy. So it's
a bit like saying medication can treat depression. Well,
that's true. But which medication and like medication, psychotherapy
has biological effects on the brain. And in fact,
the body and so those effects relate to who
might or might not respond um to the intervention.
So something like cognitive behavioral therapy, for example, is
about as effective as antidepressant drugs for depression, meaning
50 to 60% of people will see a response
after a course of C BT. But that means
it doesn't work for everyone. It doesn't work perfectly,
it might work, but it is insufficient to fully
treat depression. Um I think one of the most
exciting sort of future avenues is actually marrying the
treatments we traditionally think of as biological like drugs,
brain stimulation with psychological therapy. And I think psychedelics
may hold particular potential for that. So thinking of
them not as stand alone treatments, the way we
might think of antidepressants, but as augmentative treatments, treatments
that can enhance specific things happening during a a
psychotherapy session.
So something that sometimes we hear from people that
bring it to the table as a criticism of
psychotherapy, people who question its efficacy um is that
they sometimes cite studies which apparently indicate that many
or or psychotherapy works as well as many other
common activities like I don't know, talking to a
friend, going to the church, talking to the priest,
something like that. So uh what would would be
your reply to that?
So good psychotherapy trials will always compare the treatment
of interest, say cognitive behavioral therapy with an active
intervention, which would be usually something like psychoeducation, which
means you sit with the therapist and you sort
of get educated on different psychological factors. So it's
not intervening in them the way that something like
cognitive behavioral therapy is, but it is giving you
something the contact, the support. So those are the
trials that I look for to see if therapy
is effective and they are harder to do. And
rarer than the other type of trials that maybe
compare it with nothing or sitting on a wait
list, which can sometimes be worse for mental health
than doing nothing. So I agree with the kind
of challenges of running psychotherapy trials. But um but
I would argue that having a good control group
can make up for that and and it does
in many cases um of psychological therapy. So there
are some types of therapy, for example, exposure therapy
that are just extremely effective for particular conditions. Like
say you have a phobia exposure therapy is very
effective for that for that condition much more so
than talking to a friend would be. Um I
would also say that it's not a problem that's
unique to psychotherapy. So um psychedelics also have a
problem with the placebo effect. Um BECAUSE so like
psychotherapy expectations play a big role in your response.
Um And even there's a great paper called tripping
on nothing where people had um psychedelic like responses
to being told they were taking a new psychedelic
that was actually a placebo pill. So um psychotherapy
studies, I would like to see an active intervention
like psychoeducation. Um AND also psychedelic studies, I would
like to see an active control group, maybe something
that also makes people feel a bit high.
So just to cover another set of uh treatment
slash interventions, um what can we tell about electrical
stimulation and deep brain stimulation at this point?
So my lab has done a lot of work
on electrical brain stimulation and this can mean a
big variety of different things. So I want to
kind of draw some of the, the clarifications before
I answer your question. Historically, people might have heard
of something like electroconvulsive therapy, um which has, you
know, very negative societal connotations. It's still used today
in patients with very severe depression. And in fact,
it is the most effective medical intervention for very
severe depression where people haven't responded to anything else.
So I think, you know, there's, there's even room
for something at the more um interventionist side of
electrical stimulation for some patients. There's a lot of
controversy about it um which I'm happy to get
into. Uh BUT I think there is a role.
Um BUT I think for a much larger number
of patients, different types of milder brain stimulation can
be effective. So for example, something called repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation or RT MS is an effective treatment
for depression. You get several sessions in a row
pace than something like therapy where you're getting it
once a week. This you're often getting sort of
five days in a row for a couple of
weeks and then, then it can sustain for a
period of time after that often months. So um
or sometimes longer. So I would say there is
room for other kinds of brain stimulation approaches and
to be applied even in more mild to moderate
cases of depression, especially people who don't respond to
drugs or therapy.
Uh BY the way, just out of curiosity you
mentioned briefly there that are some controversies associated with
the electrical stimulation. Could you tell us a little
bit about that?
Yeah. So I think some of this controversy emerges
because the technique itself has changed over the years.
So that's kind of fair enough. Some of it
has emerged because especially, you know, many decades ago
people received it without their consent or full knowledge
of what would happen. So that's obviously a kind
of unethical approach. But I also think sometimes the
controversies emerge because of just genuine complexities of the
treatment and the condition. So I'll give you, you
know, 11 example, for example is that people um
uh worried about CT say that there might be
brain damage that can occur from CT and, and
actually, there is no robust evidence to suggest that's
the case, there's even animal studies to, to um
suggest brain growth that happens after T. So I
I am very skeptical of those claims, I'm not
so skeptical of claims of memory disruption after CT,
that seems to be a more robustly reported phenomenon,
but in the vast majority of cases in, in
studies that seems to disappear. So it seems to
be a kind of short term. And the problem
with those claims is that people with depression have
memory problems, so it's very difficult to control, you
know, have a sort of placebo T group um
to control for it. So I think that there's
actually still some uncertainty um about that particular side
effect. But in both cases, of course, I have
immense sympathy for anyone who's had a treatment and
feels even subjectively that it's had a really negative
consequence on their mental cognitive, physical health. And that's
the case across interventions. But for CT as well.
Mhm. So, I have one last topic here. I
would like to ask you about, we've been talking
here a lot about treatments and interventions or medical
treatments. So, is there anything we can do for
our mental health ourselves? I mean, is there some
sort of mentally healthy lifestyle?
I think that's the question everyone would really like
to know the answer to. And so that was
why I, I made sure, you know, I wanted
to write a book that wasn't just about medical
interventions, but also about lifestyle interventions and whether they
really do or don't matter. And my short answer
is yes, I do think that there are many
things you can do to improve your mental health
in terms of an individual in their lifestyle. But
often those things are a little bit annoying because
there are things that improve your physical health and
then have knock on effects on your mental health.
So exercise is actually a great example and exercise.
Yes, epidemiological evidence like with inflammation in the microbiome,
but also causal evidence, really good trials that show
that giving someone an exercise intervention seems to decrease
symptoms of depression and there are a lot of
sort of interesting mechanisms why that might be things
that changes in the brain, it might affect motivation,
it might affect different aspects of neuroplasticity. Um REALLY
uh rich, rich new field there. But I would
say that's a great example of a lifestyle intervention.
Dietary interventions are a little bit less clear. I
think there is evidence to suggest that if you
have particular dietary deficits say that you have anemia,
it may well have mental health consequences for you.
So it's very important not to have things like
that. But whether having more of certain things in
your diet will help your mental health. I think
we're actually still a little bit more ambiguous about
that, but there could still be these kind of
secondary effects via healthier um you know, cardiovascular system
or digestive system that then could impact mental health.
So I, you know, I feel positively about them
even if I don't think it's always a direct
connection.
So uh and related to that, and this will
be my last question. Is there a risk of
people becoming too obsessed with healthy lifestyles or with
particular kinds of lifestyles that are marketed and the
marketed here is very important as healthy. I mean,
sometimes we see on social media or hear about
some uh sketchy interventions out there that are really
pseudoscience. So, is there a risk there of becoming
obsessed with that kind of thing?
Yeah, I I absolutely think there is, I mean,
I guess you can tell from this whole interview
that I'm a little bit of a skeptic on
many of the, um, and many of the most
trendy things in mental health. And not that I
don't think there's sort of interesting science there, but
I, I wouldn't necessarily advise everyone to go and
take them up myself. And I think that kind
of, that idea that you could maybe have an
influencer suggest that if you just do one thing,
it's going to absolutely change your mental health for
the better. Yeah. It, it could be innocuous, it
could be dangerous. This is exactly the sort of
thing that can lead to, um, eating disorders, like
orthorexia people being extremely, extremely particular in what they
eat because of belief that certain foods are bad
for them and that can be really destructive for
your mental health. Even something like exercise taken to
a extreme can be bad for your mental health.
If you look one of them, one of my
favorite studies that I talk about in the book
shows this great positive relationship between amount of exercise
and mental health. Up to a point. If you're
exercising more than about four times a week, it's
actually worse for your mental health to do more
and nobody knows why there might be a kind
of complex non causal relationship there. But still, I
wouldn't run around saying the more the better. Um,
YET, and And so I guess I feel in
general that there is a really important message here
about moderation, even moderation on the things that are
themselves moderate. So not too much austerity either. Um,
BECAUSE I think that we run the risk of
kind of becoming so invested in these things that
might make a tiny difference. But the fact of
engaging with them might make a bigger difference to
our mental health negatively in that case.
Yeah, I, I guess that recently I've had a
conversation with an anthropologist and we talked about, I
mean, this might not seem related at all, but
at least to some extent there is we talked
about the evolution of bipedalism in humans. And uh
we in our industrialized or post industrial societies usually
under use our bodies. But then uh anthropologists also
point to the fact that, hey, OK, that's true.
But in traditional societies, perhaps people overuse their bodies
or misuse their bodies. So perhaps in a way,
uh that's the idea related here to uh how
we should deal with some of these treatments or
habits or activities. I mean, it has to be
in moderation,
right? Yeah, I absolutely agree.
Great. So the book is again The Balanced Brain,
the Science of mental health. And I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box of the
interview and doctor, no, apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work? On the internet.
Yeah, you're more than welcome to get in touch
with me on Twitter uh X at Camilla. Nor
um and you can look at my lab website,
nord.co.uk if you're interested in being in any of
our studies or just reading about the kinds of
work that we're doing.
Great. So I'm also adding that to the description
of the interview and thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been a pleasure to talk with you.
A real pleasure. Thank you for having me.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche, O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson, ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter. Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Alek medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati W Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.